DOC: User Guide Page on user-defined functions (#61195)
pandas-dev/pandas: doc/source/user_guide/user_defined_functions.rst

* **Handling Complex Grouped Operations**: Performing operations on grouped data that standard methods do not support.

Methods that support User-Defined Functions
-------------------------------------------

User-Defined Functions can be applied across various pandas methods:

* :meth:`~DataFrame.apply` - A flexible method that allows applying a function to Series,
  DataFrames, or groups of data.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.agg` (Aggregate) - Used for summarizing data, supporting multiple
  aggregation functions.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.transform` - Applies a function to groups while preserving the shape of
  the original data.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.filter` - Filters groups based on a list of Boolean conditions.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.map` - Applies an element-wise function to a Series, useful for
  transforming individual values.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.pipe` - Allows chaining custom functions to process entire DataFrames or
  Series in a clean, readable manner.

All of these pandas methods can be used with both Series and DataFrame objects, providing versatile
ways to apply UDFs across different pandas data structures.

.. note::

>     Some of these methods are can also be applied to Groupby Objects. Refer to :ref:`groupby`.

Reviewer: Can you also make a mention of resample, rolling, expanding, and ewm. Perhaps link to each section in the User Guide.

Reviewer: Can we add the other objects to this note, it seems to me they all belong together.

```suggestion
    Some of these methods are can also be applied to groupby, resample, and various window objects. See :ref:`groupby`, :ref:`resample()<timeseries>`, :ref:`rolling()<window>`, :ref:`expanding()<window>`, and :ref:`ewm()<window>` for details.
```

on your specific task. Each method has its strengths and is designed for different use
cases. Understanding the purpose and behavior of each method will help you make informed
decisions, ensuring more efficient and maintainable code.

Below is a table overview of all methods that accept UDFs:

+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Method           | Purpose                              | Supports UDFs             | Keeps Shape        | Performance               | Recommended Use Case                     |
+==================+======================================+===========================+====================+===========================+==========================================+
| :meth:`apply`    | General-purpose function             | Yes                       | Yes (when axis=1)  | Slow                      | Custom row-wise or column-wise operations|
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+

> | :meth:`agg`      | Aggregation                          | Yes                       | No                 | Fast (if using built-ins) | Custom aggregation logic                 |

Reviewer: `Fast (if using built-ins)`

We should decide if this page is about using UDFs, in which case I think e.g. `.agg("sum")` is not within the scope, or if it's about using methods that take UDFs.

I'd suggest the former, and remove any mention of not using UDFs - and with that the performance column.

+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`pipe`     | Functional chaining                  | Yes                       | Yes                | Depends on function       | Building clean pipelines                 |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`filter`   | Row/Column selection                 | Not directly              | Yes                | Fast                      | Subsetting based on conditions           |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+

:meth:`DataFrame.apply`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`DataFrame.apply` allows you to apply UDFs along either rows or columns. While flexible,
it is slower than vectorized operations and should be used only when you need operations
that cannot be achieved with built-in pandas functions.

> When to use: :meth:`DataFrame.apply` is suitable when no alternative vectorized method is available, but consider

Reviewer: I think we should recommend when no other UDF method is suitable as well.

        'Values': [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
    })

    # Using transform with mean
    df['Mean_Transformed'] = df.groupby('Category')['Values'].transform('mean')

    # Using transform with sum
    df['Sum_Transformed'] = df.groupby('Category')['Values'].transform('sum')

    # Result broadcasted to DataFrame
    print(df)

:meth:`DataFrame.filter`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`DataFrame.filter` method is used to select subsets of the DataFrame’s
columns or row. It is useful when you want to extract specific columns or rows that
match particular conditions.

When to use: Use :meth:`DataFrame.filter` when you want to use a UDF to create a subset of a DataFrame or Series

.. note::
    :meth:`DataFrame.filter` does not accept UDFs, but can accept
    list comprehensions that have UDFs applied to them.

.. ipython:: python

    # Sample DataFrame
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'AA': [1, 2, 3],
        'BB': [4, 5, 6],
        'C': [7, 8, 9],
        'D': [10, 11, 12]
    })

    # Define a function that filters out columns where the name is longer than 1 character
    def is_long_name(column_name):
        return len(column_name) > 1

>     df_filtered = df[[col for col in df.columns if is_long_name(col)]]

Reviewer: This example doesn't actually use `.filter`. Shouldn't it?

    print(df_filtered)

Since filter does not directly accept a UDF, you have to apply the UDF indirectly,
such as by using list comprehensions.

Documentation can be found :meth:`~DataFrame.filter`.

:meth:`DataFrame.map`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:meth:`DataFrame.map` is used specifically to apply element-wise UDFs and is better
for this purpose compared to :meth:`DataFrame.apply` because of its better performance.

When to use: Use map for applying element-wise UDFs to DataFrames or Series.

Documentation can be found :meth:`~DataFrame.map`.

:meth:`DataFrame.pipe`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipe method is useful for chaining operations together into a clean and readable pipeline.
It is a helpful tool for organizing complex data processing workflows.

> When to use: Use pipe when you need to create a pipeline of transformations and want to keep the code readable and maintainable.

Reviewer: Nit: We'll probably want to stay away from `transformations` here to avoid confusion with `.transform`. I'd suggest `operations`.

.. _user_defined_functions:

{{ header }}

**************************************

> Introduction to User-Defined Functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User-Defined Functions (UDFs)
```

This will be what will be shown in the index too, so better to be concise. Also, better for consistency to remove the `Introduction to`, which we could have in every other user guide too.

**************************************

In pandas, User-Defined Functions (UDFs) provide a way to extend the library’s
functionality by allowing users to apply custom computations to their data. While
pandas comes with a set of built-in functions for data manipulation, UDFs offer
flexibility when built-in methods are not sufficient. These functions can be
applied at different levels: element-wise, row-wise, column-wise, or group-wise,

> and change the data differently, depending on the method used.

Reviewer: nit: "change the data differently" sounds very close to mutating in a UDF, which we explicitly do not support. What do you think of "behave differently".

Author: “Behave differently” sounds clearer and avoids implying mutation. I'll update it

> Why Not To Use User-Defined Functions

Reviewer 2: Maybe just personal opinion, but to me it makes more sense to explain what UDFs are in pandas before explaining when not to use them. This order seems reasonable assuming users already know what pandas udfs are in practice, but I'd personally prefer not to assume it in the user guide for UDFs.

In my opinion, after the previous introduction which is great, I'd show a very simple example so we make sure users reading this understand the very basics.

Something like:

```python
def add_one(x):
    return x + 1

my_series = pd.Series([1, 2, 3])

my_series.map(add_one)
```

Building on top of this, like then showing the same with a `DataFrame`, at some point showing UDFs that receive the whole column with `.apply`... should help make sure users are following and understanding all the information provided here.

Reviewer: I am a bit negative here. This is duplicating a lot of other documentation that we already have. I think we should instead link to that documentation.

Reviewer 2: Do you mind pointing out to an specific example @rhshadrach? I found documentation for the aggregate functions, but not much for the `map`, `apply`... on `Series` and `DataFrame` other than in the API docs. I agree with not having much duplication. Personally, if there is few here and there like in the FAQs, Performance page... I'd rather have the docs related to these methods in this page, as it feels like the natural place, and link to the sections here in the FAQs, performance hints, groupby user guide... Of course there can be cases where it makes more sense the opposite, but maybe we can discuss the specific cases where there is duplication.

Reviewer 2: I totally missed the Essential basic functionality page, thanks for pointing that out. Fully agree with you that what I proposed here is repeating again the whole https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/basics.html#function-application section . And I  agree that's not a good idea.

Personally, I'd rather not have that section, and have that content here. At least in my experience, map and apply are common, but not essential as other parts described in that page. And also, I think the structure of the user guide will be clearer and easier to find things with the changes.

For the `DataFrame.agg`, there is already a groupby page, and I think just having the methods in the lists of methods that support udfs would be good, and then just a mention that points out to the group by page where all the detail explanation regarding groupping is presented with examples.

There may be other structures, but what I'd like is that we can give users structure to the related methods. I think `Series` has around 200 methods and attributes. Users having to navigate that whole API to find out themselves that map, apply and pipe are kind of the same just changing the input of the udf, doesn't seem ideal. I think this page here can really help in that.

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, I think I understand your point better now. Maybe I'd like to improve a bit the apply/maps docs in essential, but that's unrelated to this PR. And happy to move forward here focussing on the UDFs and not on the methods, as you describe.

> -----------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: Not sure if Sphinx is more flexible now, but this had to be the same exact length as the title before.

Reviewer: Title marker needs to be at least as long as the text, but can be longer.

* **Custom Computations Are Needed**: Implementing complex logic or domain-specific calculations that pandas'
  built-in methods cannot handle.
* **Extending pandas' Functionality**: Applying external libraries or specialized algorithms unavailable in pandas.
* **Handling Complex Grouped Operations**: Performing operations on grouped data that standard methods do not support.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

    # Sample data
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'group': ['A', 'A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'B'],
        'x': [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
        'y': [2, 4, 6, 1, 2, 1.5]
    })

    # Function to fit a model to each group
    def fit_model(group):
        model = LinearRegression()
        model.fit(group[['x']], group['y'])
        group['y_pred'] = model.predict(group[['x']])
        return group

    result = df.groupby('group').apply(fit_model)

Methods that support User-Defined Functions
-------------------------------------------

User-Defined Functions can be applied across various pandas methods:

* :meth:`~DataFrame.apply` - A flexible method that allows applying a function to Series,

>   DataFrames, or groups of data.

Reviewer: I'm thinking we should remove `groups of data` here. `DataFrame.apply` that you're referencing doesn't operate on groups, and you mention groupby below.

+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`filter`   | Row/Column selection                 | Not directly              | Yes                | Subsetting based on conditions           |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+------------------------------------------+

:meth:`DataFrame.apply`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`DataFrame.apply` allows you to apply UDFs along either rows or columns. While flexible,
it is slower than vectorized operations and should be used only when you need operations
that cannot be achieved with built-in pandas functions.

When to use: :meth:`DataFrame.apply` is suitable when no alternative vectorized method or UDF method is available,
but consider optimizing performance with vectorized operations wherever possible.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.apply`.

:meth:`DataFrame.agg`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to aggregate data, :meth:`DataFrame.agg` is a better choice than apply because it is
specifically designed for aggregation operations.

> When to use: Use :meth:`DataFrame.agg` for performing aggregations like sum, mean, or custom aggregation
> functions across groups.

Reviewer: Things like `.agg(["sum", "mean"])` aren't UDFs, so I don't think they should be mentioned here, and it could be make users think these types of usages are slow (they are not).

```suggestion
When to use: Use :meth:`DataFrame.agg` for performing custom aggregations, where the operation returns a scalar value on each input.
```

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.agg`.

:meth:`DataFrame.transform`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The transform method is ideal for performing element-wise transformations while preserving the shape of the original DataFrame.
It is generally faster than apply because it can take advantage of pandas' internal optimizations.

When to use: When you need to perform element-wise transformations that retain the original structure of the DataFrame.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.transform`.

Attempting to use common aggregation functions such as ``mean`` or ``sum`` will result in
values being broadcasted to the original dimensions:

.. ipython:: python

    # Sample DataFrame
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'Category': ['A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'B'],
        'Values': [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
    })

    # Using transform with mean

>     df['Mean_Transformed'] = df.groupby('Category')['Values'].transform('mean')

Reviewer: This isn't an example of a UDF. I really like your example of using linear regression - can we do that here? It's a bit unfortunate that groupby.transform does not allow operating on the entire group (only works column-by-column) here.

```python
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

df = pd.DataFrame({
    'group': ['A', 'A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'B'],
    'x': [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
    'y': [2, 4, 6, 1, 2, 1.5]
}).set_index("x")

# Function to fit a model to each group
def fit_model(group):
    x = group.index.to_frame()
    y = group
    model = LinearRegression()
    model.fit(x, y)
    pred = model.predict(x)
    return pred

result = df.groupby('group').transform(fit_model)
```

        'x': [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
        'y': [2, 4, 6, 1, 2, 1.5]
    })

    # Function to fit a model to each group
    def fit_model(group):
        model = LinearRegression()
        model.fit(group[['x']], group['y'])
        group['y_pred'] = model.predict(group[['x']])
        return group

    result = df.groupby('group').apply(fit_model)

Methods that support User-Defined Functions
-------------------------------------------

User-Defined Functions can be applied across various pandas methods:

* :meth:`~DataFrame.apply` - A flexible method that allows applying a function to Series and
  DataFrames.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.agg` (Aggregate) - Used for summarizing data, supporting custom
  aggregation functions.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.transform` - Applies a function to Series and Dataframes while preserving the shape of
  the original data.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.filter` - Filters Series and Dataframes based on a list of Boolean conditions.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.map` - Applies an element-wise function to a Series or Dataframe, useful for
  transforming individual values.
* :meth:`~DataFrame.pipe` - Allows chaining custom functions to process Series or

>   Dataframes in a clean, readable manner.

Reviewer 2: What do you think about having this as a table? Personally I think it should make it easier to understand the differences about the methods. As a general idea:

| method | function input | function output | description |
|-------------|----------|----------------|-------|
| map       | scalar | scalar | map each element to the element returned by the function elementwise |
| apply(axis=0 | column | column | map each column to the column returned by the function |
| apply(axis=1) | row | row |  map each row to the row returned by the function |
| pipe | series or dataframe | series or dataframe | map the series or dataframe to a new series or dataframe returned by the function |

Not sure if it makes sense to combine with the table below.

Author: Yeah I agree with you, thanks for the suggestion!

When to use: When you need to perform element-wise transformations that retain the original structure of the DataFrame.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.transform`.

.. code-block:: python

    from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'group': ['A', 'A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'B'],
        'x': [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
        'y': [2, 4, 6, 1, 2, 1.5]
    }).set_index("x")

    # Function to fit a model to each group
    def fit_model(group):
        x = group.index.to_frame()
        y = group
        model = LinearRegression()
        model.fit(x, y)
        pred = model.predict(x)
        return pred

    result = df.groupby('group').transform(fit_model)

:meth:`DataFrame.filter`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`DataFrame.filter` method is used to select subsets of the DataFrame’s
columns or row. It is useful when you want to extract specific columns or rows that
match particular conditions.

When to use: Use :meth:`DataFrame.filter` when you want to use a UDF to create a subset of a DataFrame or Series

.. note::
    :meth:`DataFrame.filter` does not accept UDFs, but can accept

>     list comprehensions that have UDFs applied to them.

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure on having `filter` here for now. I think it's very good that you added it, as it doesn't support udfs, but it probably should. So, it opens a discussion we probably want to have about adding them. @rhshadrach thoughts?

Reviewer: I suspect the reason this was added is that `DataFrameGroupBy.filter` does accept UDFs. Perhaps that should be mentioned instead?

I actually think `DataFrame.filter` should accept Boolean masks, similar to PySpark and Polars. But agreed that discussion is not for here!

    # Function that filters out columns where the name is longer than 1 character
    def is_long_name(column_name):
        return len(column_name) > 1

    df_filtered = df.filter(items=[col for col in df.columns if is_long_name(col)])
    print(df_filtered)

Since filter does not directly accept a UDF, you have to apply the UDF indirectly,
for example, by using list comprehensions.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.filter`.

:meth:`DataFrame.map`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:meth:`DataFrame.map` is used specifically to apply element-wise UDFs and is better
for this purpose compared to :meth:`DataFrame.apply` because of its better performance.

When to use: Use map for applying element-wise UDFs to DataFrames or Series.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.map`.

:meth:`DataFrame.pipe`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipe method is useful for chaining operations together into a clean and readable pipeline.
It is a helpful tool for organizing complex data processing workflows.

When to use: Use pipe when you need to create a pipeline of operations and want to keep the code readable and maintainable.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.pipe`.

> Best Practices

Reviewer 2: Maybe just personal preference, but these last 3 sections seem to be talking about the same (performance), I'd have just a section about performance.

I'd keep it short for now, and we can iterate over it later. The reason is that each time we review this before merging it we need to re-read the whole document. So, if we can finish the main part above first, and have this as a placeholder, then in a second PR we can focus more on performance without having to keep reviewing the first part again.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.map`.

:meth:`DataFrame.pipe`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipe method is useful for chaining operations together into a clean and readable pipeline.
It is a helpful tool for organizing complex data processing workflows.

When to use: Use pipe when you need to create a pipeline of operations and want to keep the code readable and maintainable.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.pipe`.

Performance
-----------

While UDFs provide flexibility, their use is currently discouraged as they can introduce
performance issues, especially when written in pure Python. To improve efficiency,
consider using built-in ``NumPy`` or ``pandas`` functions instead of UDFs
for common operations.

.. note::
    If performance is critical, explore **vectorizated operations** before resorting
    to UDFs.

Vectorized Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below is a comparison of using UDFs versus using Vectorized Operations:

.. code-block:: python

    # User-defined function
    def calc_ratio(row):
        return 100 * (row["one"] / row["two"])

    df["new_col"] = df.apply(calc_ratio, axis=1)

    # Vectorized Operation

>     df["new_col2"] = 100 * (df["one"] / df["two"])

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth mentioning and comparing also `.pipe`, which is both vectorized and a udf?

+----------------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`filter`             | -                      | -                        | Return rows that satisfy a boolean condition                              |
+----------------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`pipe`               | Series/DataFrame       | Series/DataFrame         | Chain functions together to apply to Series or Dataframe                  |
+----------------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. note::
    Some of these methods are can also be applied to groupby, resample, and various window objects.
    See :ref:`groupby`, :ref:`resample()<timeseries>`, :ref:`rolling()<window>`, :ref:`expanding()<window>`,
    and :ref:`ewm()<window>` for details.

> Choosing the Right Method

Reviewer 2: Personally I'd only keep the first table. I think the description can already explain anything not clear present in the second table.

And I'd make this section `choosing the right method` part of the `Methods that support User-Defined Functions`. To me it feels like we're having two sections for mostly the same.

| :meth:`pipe`     | Functional chaining                  | Yes                       | Yes                | Building clean operation pipelines       |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :meth:`filter`   | Row/Column selection                 | Not directly              | Yes                | Subsetting based on conditions           |
+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+------------------------------------------+

:meth:`DataFrame.apply`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :meth:`DataFrame.apply` allows you to apply UDFs along either rows or columns. While flexible,
it is slower than vectorized operations and should be used only when you need operations
that cannot be achieved with built-in pandas functions.

When to use: :meth:`DataFrame.apply` is suitable when no alternative vectorized method or UDF method is available,
but consider optimizing performance with vectorized operations wherever possible.

> Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.apply`.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove this for all methods, as the title section and every mention of `apply` will already be a link.

The :meth:`DataFrame.filter` method is used to select subsets of the DataFrame’s
columns or row. It is useful when you want to extract specific columns or rows that
match particular conditions.

When to use: Use :meth:`DataFrame.filter` when you want to use a UDF to create a subset of a DataFrame or Series

.. note::
    :meth:`DataFrame.filter` does not accept UDFs, but can accept
    list comprehensions that have UDFs applied to them.

.. ipython:: python

    # Sample DataFrame
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'AA': [1, 2, 3],
        'BB': [4, 5, 6],
        'C': [7, 8, 9],
        'D': [10, 11, 12]
    })

    # Function that filters out columns where the name is longer than 1 character
    def is_long_name(column_name):
        return len(column_name) > 1

    df_filtered = df.filter(items=[col for col in df.columns if is_long_name(col)])
    print(df_filtered)

Since filter does not directly accept a UDF, you have to apply the UDF indirectly,
for example, by using list comprehensions.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.filter`.

:meth:`DataFrame.map`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:meth:`DataFrame.map` is used specifically to apply element-wise UDFs and is better

> for this purpose compared to :meth:`DataFrame.apply` because of its better performance.

Reviewer 2: I don't think map is more performant than apply, in general apply will be more performant. I'd remove this as a reason, as it depends a lot on the use case, and I don't think this is a general rule.

Author: Got it. Just curious: Why is applying generally more performant than mapping in practice? I thought map was faster for simple element-wise UDFs.

Reviewer 2: In map, without anything special, pandas should necessarily loop in Python over the elements, casting each to a PyObject. In apply the same can be true, but since a whole column is given to the user, the user could also use vectorization. Like, a simple function doing a `x + 1` would be fast when using apply and slow when using map. That's why I wouldn't say map is faster.

When to use: Use map for applying element-wise UDFs to DataFrames or Series.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.map`.

:meth:`DataFrame.pipe`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipe method is useful for chaining operations together into a clean and readable pipeline.
It is a helpful tool for organizing complex data processing workflows.

When to use: Use pipe when you need to create a pipeline of operations and want to keep the code readable and maintainable.

Documentation can be found at :meth:`~DataFrame.pipe`.

Performance
-----------

While UDFs provide flexibility, their use is generally discouraged as they can introduce
performance issues, especially when written in pure Python. To improve efficiency,
consider using built-in ``NumPy`` or ``pandas`` functions instead of UDFs
for common operations.

.. note::

>     If performance is critical, explore **vectorizated operations** before resorting

Reviewer 2: vectorized?
